title: Modelling problem solving in Raven's Progressive Matrices

Principle Investigator: [Daniel Rasmussen](?q=node/488)

Raven's Progressive Matrices is one of the most widely used tests of general
intelligence. It has been found to be both domain independent and highly
correlated with other measures of intellectual ability [Marshalek et al.,
1983]. In the RPM subjects are presented with a 3x3 matrix, where each cell--
except for the blank cell in the bottom right--contains multiple features. The
task is to determine, given eight possibilities, which answer belongs in the
blank cell. Subjects accomplish this by finding the rules that govern the
features in each row or column. Once these rules have been found, they can be
applied to the last row/column to determine which features will complete the
rule in the blank cell. This task requires a complex array of cognitive
abilities, and so represents an interesting challenge for understanding human
intelligence.

There are many theories as to how subjects go about solving these matrices.
Over the years researchers have focused on topics including the di fferent
types of rules (Carpenter et al. [1990], DeShon et al. [1995]), error types
(Babcock [2002]), the importance of early visual processing (Meo et al.
[2007]), working memory (Kyllonen and Christal [1990]), and executive
functions (Unsworth and Engle [2005]).

There are two significant tasks which stand out as necessary to flesh out this
research. The first is developing a working model that combines these theories
to recreate human performance. This is the proverbial proof in the pudding; if
our theories about how subjects solve the RPM are correct, then we should be
able to use those theories to solve the RPM. The second gap in the RPM
literature is an explanation of how subjects create new rules. What is missing
is that crucial intermediate step; we have theories on how visual information
is collected in RPM situations, and given a set of rules we have theories on
how they are used to solve the matrix, but we are lacking in theories that
explain how we make that move from visual information to rule.
