title: SYDE 556 Course Outline

_Course Title_:

Simulating Neurobiological Systems (SYDE 556/750 topic 8)

_Instructor_:

Chris Eliasmith ([celiasmith@uwaterloo.ca](mailto:celiasmith@uwaterloo.ca), HH
331, x32638)

_Room and Time_:

DWE, Mon & Wed. 11:00a-12:20p

_Texts_:

Eliasmith and Anderson (2003). Neural Engineering: Representation, Computation
and Dynamics in Neurobiological Systems. MIT Press.

_Homepage_:

http://ctnsrv.uwaterloo.ca/cnrglab/NEFcourse

_Course Description_: This course examines a general framework for modeling
computation by neurobiological systems with an emphasis on quantitative
formulations. Particular emphasis will be placed on understanding computation,
representation, and dynamics in such systems. Students will learn how the
fundamentals of signal processing, control theory and statistical inference,
can be applied to modeling sensory, motor, and cognitive systems.

_Prerequisites:_ Knowing how to program using MATLAB is highly recommended.
Familiarity with calculus and linear algebra is required.

**_Schedule_**:

**Week**
**Reading**
**Topic**

Jan 7

Chp 1

Introduction

&nbsp_place_holder;Jan 14

Chp 2

Simple population codes

Chp 4

LIF neurons and temporal coding

21

Chp 4

Advanced single cell models

28

Chp 5

Chp 6

Population-temporal coding (and) Feedforward transformations

Feb 4

Chp 6 Chp 3

Nonlinear transformations (and) More complex population codes

11

Chp 7

Analyzing representation and transformation

18

Reading week

&nbsp_place_holder;

25

Chp 8

Dynamics/Neural control

Mar 4

Chp 8

Dynamics/Neural control cont.

11

Chp 9 (Mar ??? van der Meer lab: B1 282)

Statistical inference and learning

18

Chp 9



25

Brief Project Presentations

&nbsp_place_holder;

Apr 1

Brief Project Presentations

Project due: Apr 23

**_Grading_**: The course requires the writing of a series of programming assignments (60%), and a final project (40%). Assignments are due electronically by midnight of the due date. Late assignments lose 1 mark per day. Assignments are to be done individually.

_Academic Integrity:_ In order to maintain a culture of academic integrity,
members of the University of Waterloo are expected to promote honesty, trust,
fairness, respect and responsibility.

_Discipline:_ A student is expected to know what constitutes academic
integrity, to avoid committing academic offences, and to take responsibility
for his/her actions. A student who is unsure whether an action constitutes an
offence, or who needs help in learning how to avoid offences (e.g.,
plagiarism, cheating) or about "rules" for group work/collaboration should
seek guidance from the course professor, academic advisor, or the
Undergraduate Associate Dean. When misconduct has been found to have occurred,
disciplinary penalties will be imposed under Policy 71 - Student Discipline.
For information on categories of offenses and types of penalties, students
should refer to Policy 71 - Student Discipline,
http://www.adm.uwaterloo.ca/infosec/Policies/policy71.htm

_Grievance_: A student who believes that a decision affecting some aspect of
his/her university life has been unfair or unreasonable may have grounds for
initiating a grievance. Read Policy 70 - Student

Petitions and Grievances, Section 4,
http://www.adm.uwaterloo.ca/infosec/Policies/policy70.htm

_Appeals_: A student may appeal the finding and/or penalty in a decision made
under Policy 70 - Student Petitions and Grievances (other than regarding a
petition) or Policy 71 - Student Discipline if a ground for an appeal can be
established. Read Policy 72 - Student Appeals,
http://www.adm.uwaterloo.ca/infosec/Policies/policy72.htm

_Academic Integrity Office (UW):_ http://uwaterloo.ca/academicintegrity/

_Accommodation for Students with Disabilities:_The Office for Persons with
Disabilities (OPD), located in Needles Hall, Room 1132, collaborates with all
academic departments to arrange appropriate accommodations for students with
disabilities without compromising the academic integrity of the curriculum. If
you require academic accommodations to lessen the impact of your disability,
please register with the OPD at the beginning of each academic term.
