title: Aplysia whole-brain model

Hello! Xuan and I (Travis) were talking about some possible side projects that
could be fun/interesting, and we arrived at the idea of developing a whole
brain NEF model of the Aplysia sea slug
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aplysia_californica) that Eric Kandel started
his work on classical conditioning on way back when (60's? who was even ALIVE
then? man). I think most everyone knows about the slug. It's a great candidate
because much(/most/all?) of the brain has been mapped out and lots of people
have researched a bunch of different areas/functions that we can hopefully use
to build on. From what I've found in my (admittedly incomplete) search of the
internet all that has been developed are models of different areas of the
Aplysia brain and almost all the ones I've found don't model functions, but
put together a network of neurons with similar connections as found in Aplysia
and then run and see what happens. So I thought we could start a private page
on here to post about the development here and chat about this in time when we
need breaks from our own projects, plus it will probably help get everyone
into the whole brain model thinking for the other models we're developing.
Thoughts? Ideas? Already completed models? Here are some links! [Sea Slug
Nervous System Model](http://www.seaslugforum.net/display.cfm?id=4690)
[Cyberbranchaea - Optimal Foraging
Simulation](http://www.life.illinois.edu/slugcity/cyberslug.html) [Learning
and Memory in Aplysia](http://brembs.net/learning/aplysia/) [Neural Mechanisms
of Motor Program Switching in
Aplysia](http://www.jneurosci.org/cgi/content/abstract/21/18/7349) [A Simple
Aplysia-Like Spiking Neural Network to Generate Adaptive Behavior in
Autonomous Robots](http://adb.sagepub.com/cgi/content/abstract/16/5/306?rss=1)
[Development of the nervous system of Aplysia californica.](http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.fcgi?artid=393264)
